
This documents what ejf has done regarding recognition and correction of
errors to the Cologne MW dictionary.  The starting point was the file
mwtot2.txt, as described in mwdoc1.txt.  The following files are relevant
to the question:
 lisp/mw.el  elisp code which contains the functions used.  Some functions
    not related to errors is also included.
 lisp/mwdoc.el  contains a large section called 'CHANGE LOG'. Most of
    the changes are referenced, in order of doing, in this section.

 mw directory contains all the files pertaining to the dictionary versions.
 mw/mwtot2.txt is the file started with, obtained via the 'mwsdd' program
   made available by Bontes.
 mw/SL-mwtot2.txt is almost the same as mwtot2.txt
 mw/SL-mwtot3.txt is the current edition of file. 
 There are a few (about 15) prior versions exist. The naming conventions
   used in these saved versions is related to the function names in the
   'CHANGE LOG'.  For instance 'SL-mwtot3-5a4', the first saved, shows the
   file after changes made by the function 'modify-SLmwtot3-5a4'.
   Thus, changes made by functions 'modify-SLmwtot3-5a5' - 
   'modify-SLmwtot3-7a1' are not included in this file.
   

 The automated changes accomplished in the 'modify-...' functions are
  usually regular expression replacements.

 An independent series of changes was non-automated.  These changes were
 made on the text file (SL-mwtot3.txt) using the EMACS text editor.  However,
 with few exceptions, these 'manual changes' were documented, as follows.
 The interactive command 'MWS' was written.  One invokes the command while
 editing the SL-mwtot3.txt file. When the MWS command is invoked, the 
 user is prompted answer 'O' or 'N' for 'old'/'new' = 'before change'/'after'.
 The MWS command then appends the line containing the cursor into a 
 date-stamped file, e.g., 'modify-SLmwtot3-2005Jul02.txt'. So, one would
 typically (a) position the cursor in the line needing a correction,
 (b) invoke MWS with 'O', (c) use EMACS text editing facilities to make
  the correction, leaving the cursor within the line, (d) invoke 'MWS' with
 'N' to record the new record.   A little bit of error checking is done.
 
  mw/xmw  contains many earlier manual change files, moved there from 'mw'
  just to avoid file clutter within mw.

  These 'modify...' files would provide some information on what changes
  were made.

